Previously…
This is Mrs. MacKenzie.
Your new plant inspector.
Rob Cameron.
She saw someone outside and was
scared. It was the Nuckelavee.
Deliver these letters with
the utmost discretion.
You're lucky I found you.
My name is Ian Murray. This is
William Ransom. He's been injured.
Claire Fraser is thy aunt? We've
been working closely with her.
- Suppose I'll be seeing more of you.
- Suppose so.
She grabbed me and said. "In this
classroom. we speak English."
-Why is it bad to speak Gaelic?
-It's not.
We have to evacuate.
I think I can walk
with a little support.
I'm so sorry. but it's too
soon. The sutures won't hold.
British are short on food.
They dinna have supplies
to wait for a surrender.
They'll need to take
the fort by force.
Private. where might I
find General Simon Fraser?
The brigadier? I believe
he's up in the battlements.
surveying the spoils of victory.
I encountered difficulties while
undertaking duties for Captain Richardson.
But I reached General
Burgoyne at Fort Crown Point.
and he ordered me to
report to your command.
The captain will be with
us shortly. I believe.
Very good. sir. I wish I'd arrived in time
to assist you in the battle for the fort.
Hardly a battle.
Not a single shot was fired. In
fact. the Rebels were so eager
to rid themselves of the place. they
left us their cannon as a parting gift.
But if it's a battle you're after.
Lieutenant. you've no' long to wait.
Burgoyne has ordered
us to garrison the fort
and then pursue
the Rebels south.
meet up with General Howe's men.
Howe is in the city of New York.
If he marches north…
We plan to cut off their Northern Army.
isolate New England from the colonies.
Very perceptive.
But then I'd expect no less
from the son of Lord John Grey.
Eh?
Jamie. I don't think many of these people
will be able to make it far on foot.
No choice. The gunfire is coming
from the portage point down the lake.
We can't defend if the
British have beaten us there.
It'd be safer if we make our
way inland in small groups.
I'll join the troops and
march towards Hubbardton.
Shouldn't be more than
a day or two away.
Dinna fash. Sassenach.
If anyone's legs willna
carry them. I will.
I'll have Ian go
ahead and find a path.
Come now. It's time to go.
Here. Take hold of my
arm. I'll steady thee.
That Indian. we can't trust him.
He's leading us into a trap to the
other savages. He'll kill us all.
Calm thyself. Thee has
no cause for alarm.
I won't let him take me alive. He'll
skin me while I yet draw breath.
He'll do nothing of the kind.
That is Ian. I know him.
He's as gentle as a lamb.
He's trying to help us.
Are you certain?
I trust him completely.
Come now.
Mrs. Raven.
Jamie.
These people need rest. We should
find somewhere to camp for the night.
Aye.
Indians! We'll all be killed!
Quiet. They may not
have seen us. Not yet.
Everyone off the road.
Come this way.
Stay out of sight.
Stick together.
It's just as I suspected.
Redcoats. running alongside the
road. pretending to be Indians.
Trying to scare us into
revealing our position.
Almost worked.
You and the Hunters. take these
folks deeper into the woods.
My men will stay with you. Ian
and I will draw the soldiers away.
Rachel. Denzell. let's
get everybody this way.
Quiet.
-Have you seen Mrs. Raven?
-Not since…
We were walking together
when the screaming started.
She was muttering something.
not wanting them to take her.
I tried to soothe her.
but Tommy started crying…
Where did you last see her?
All right. follow the others.
I was sorry to have to do it.
but I hadn't a choice. really.
I've got to support the
authority of my teachers.
or the whole place goes to hell.
My son only cursed because that
woman damn near tore his ear off.
And for no crime greater than
saying a few words in Gaelic.
Did Jeremiah tell you
what it was he said?
Not in detail. No.
He called Ms. Glendenning a haggard
old goat-breathed daughter of a witch.
I can imagine she
wasn't impressed.
He'll have had that one
from my father-in-law.
I would never have taught
him that particular phrase.
Ah!
But you do have the
Gaelic yourself?
Picked it up working on the fishing
boats in the Minch when I was younger.
Huh. Well. I have had a wee
word with Ms. Glendenning.
but I fear she herself is just
a symptom of a larger problem.
And what's that?
People nowadays are eager for their
children to speak good English.
get good jobs. be able
to leave the Highlands.
Aye. it's a shame.
The language is our
history. Our culture.
Highlanders have been fighting and
dying for the right to speak Gaelic…
since before the Rising.
I couldn't agree
more. You're my man.
You were a teacher once. weren't
you? You're passionate about it.
I have been wanting to hold a class
for exactly what you're talking about.
I have it right.
You were a teacher?
Aye.
I think it's the last one.
Uncle. The others fled.
We best be getting back.
Mrs. Raven?
Mrs. Raven.
Mrs. Raven. you have to come with me.
You'll be safe back with the others.
No. I'll never be
safe. They're coming.
You have to be quiet.
Oh. God.
Show yourself.
Jamie. it's me. It's Denzell.
What are you doing here?
Where are the others?
Camped safely.
But Mrs. Wellman told me Claire went
to look for one of her patients.
She never came back. It's been quite
a while. so I came looking for her.
Soldiers' boots. Three or
four of them. from this way.
Someone was dragged.
Claire.
They're heading north.
towards the fort.
Sir. may I have some water?
Sir. we need water.
May I at least go to the well
and fetch some for the sick?
Madam. my orders are none of the
prisoners are to leave this area.
Then may I suggest that you
or one of your men go get it.
Or are your orders to let
your prisoners die of thirst?
Walter.
Mrs. Fraser. Just couldn't
stay away. could you?
Where's Big Red? He make it out?
He did.
What on earth are
you doing out here?
The British needed a hospital
for their own. I suppose.
But I told them that I
was to be moved with care.
Surgeon's orders.
And they obliged me.
I'm very glad to hear it.
The bandage is dry. which indicates
the wound is healing nicely.
How are you feeling?
It's not my leg that's
bothering me. ma'am.
It's my chest.
I can't seem to
take in enough air.
Let me have a listen.
Take a long. deep breath.
Slow and steady. Walter.
When did your symptoms start?
I was feeling good
until a few hours ago.
What is it. Mrs. Fraser?
Could just be mucus in your
lungs from the damp in the air.
Then why do you look more
worried now than when we thought
the British might be firing?
I'm sorry.
It could also be an embolism.
That's where your blood
starts clotting in your lungs.
It can be a complication after
a surgery like your amputation.
That doesn't sound good.
It's not.
That's why I'm going to
keep a close eye on you.
There'll be water here soon. and I'll
try and fetch some herbs that might help.
Seeing as though I don't have
much to do this afternoon.
I suppose that'll be just fine.
Enter.
Captain Richardson. Sir.
Lieutenant Lord Ellesmere.
I came as soon as I
heard you'd arrived.
I had begun to despair
of ever seeing you again.
Apologies for my tardiness. sir.
Fate conspired to keep me in
Virginia longer than intended.
Then I take it you had ample
time to deliver my message.
Have you any for me in return?
Unfortunately. sir.
the Great Dismal Swamp
deprived me of my horse. and
with it. your correspondence.
And did you have occasion to look
at the message before it was lost?
Perhaps you attempted to break the
cipher and commit its contents to memory?
I did not read the message. sir. as
you expressly gave me orders not to.
However.
I did learn something about
its intended recipients.
And what. pray tell. is that?
I've been told that Samuel
Cartwright is a Rebel.
I've since learned that Henry Carver
and Joshua Harrington are as well.
How do you think wars
are won. Lieutenant?
- With victory on the battlefield. sir.
- Without a doubt.
But how do commanders know
where that battlefield will be?
How do they know the size and
strength of their opponent?
What their opponent's weaknesses
are. how to exploit those weaknesses.
Intelligence.
And my many years of
experience have taught me
that the best intelligence
comes from men the enemy trusts.
So those men are spies.
Eyes and ears for
the British cause.
The information in that message was
vitally important for their work.
And because of your misfortunes.
that information did not reach them.
Forgive me. Captain Richardson.
I cannot tell you how sorry I am
to have failed at this mission.
Do you know what else my years of
experience have taught me. Lieutenant?
No. sir.
War is long. No doubt an opportunity
for redemption will present itself.
I will be ready when it
does. sir. You have my word.
Very well.
Now. I suggest you reacquaint yourself
with your uniform. Lieutenant.
Your trunk traveled north with my own.
You'll find it in the officers' quarters.
She's hungry.
But my milk. well.
it's not coming as
it usually does.
Well. I'm not surprised. You've
hardly had anything to eat or drink.
That slows your milk.
I need you to drink as
much water as you can.
I'll try and find you some food.
-Here. -Thank you. ma'am.
Walter.
This should help.
Thank you. Mrs. Fraser.
Sir. Excuse me. sir. Sir!
I must insist. at the very
least that you provide
the basic necessities of
care for your prisoners.
Sir. are you hearing me?
I…
I beg your pardon. madam.
but I believe I know you.
- You're Mistress Fraser. are you not?
- I am.
I am Lieutenant Lord
Ellesmere. William Ransom.
I visited your home on Fraser's
Ridge when I was a boy.
You saved my father's life.
William?
You're a Rebel?
Yes.
My husband is a
colonel in the militia.
We were separated
and I was captured.
Now I wonder if I might
ask for some supplies.
Linens for bandages.
I'll request our regimental
surgeon send some bandages.
And food. We have a starving baby. and I
fear we're going to lose some of the sick
if we don't get some food soon.
That may be difficult.
Our supplies are still
two days behind us.
Your compatriots burned whatever
was left in the storehouses.
I'll see what can be done.
Thank you.
If you speak with your
regimental surgeon.
perhaps he could spare
some herbs and medicines.
It would do the world of good.
Your servant. madam.
You know the buzzing sound. that
feeling it gives you in your bones.
That's what I felt in the tunnel
before I found my way out.
And I saw something. too.
Not stones. but
energy. It was like...
Wait. Hold on. hold on. Bree.
Okay.
It looked like the way heat
shimmers off of asphalt.
Or water?
Oh. I don't know. it's hard to describe.
but. Roger. there's something down there.
I wonder.
- The dam's right on the loch. isn't it?
- Yes.
On the east side.
toward Pitlochry.
Do you have any sense of the
bearing of the tunnel to the dam?
The blueprints are at the
office. I could check.
But if I remember correctly.
the tunnel runs this way.
We think there's a ley line from
the Achavanich Standing Stones
to the standing stones at Craigh
na Dun. don't we? What if...
The same line continues down
toward the Errochty Dam site. Yes.
Maybe the stone circles somehow
interact with ley lines
at certain locations
to create a kind of portal.
That's as good a guess as any.
Well. engineers prefer the
term "working hypothesis."
It's as good a working
hypothesis as any.
I need this in my Hitchhiker's
Guide to Time Travel.
Wait a minute. That's
what you're calling it?
Like the BBC Radio comedy?
Not officially. but
sometimes to myself. for fun.
Uh. aren't you supposed to be doing
your Gaelic class. four o'clock?
Oh.
Fucking bollocks.
-Uh. trousers or kilt?
-Uh. kilt.
-Can you help pack my bag?
-Sure.
Uh. under the map.
Do you think the British Army
will hang their prisoners?
Aye. They dinna see them
as prisoners of war.
That would mean acknowledging
the sovereignty of America.
Instead. they see us as
traitors to the crown.
Soon as night falls. I'll find
a way in. Fetch your auntie.
It has to be me. Uncle.
If you get caught.
they will hang you.
I willna get caught.
The Mohawk have aligned
with the British.
The guards will
think me an ally.
Mohawk or no. they willna take kindly
if they see you leaving wi' a prisoner.
Uncle. I can do this.
Fine. Agreed.
But maybe there's something I can
do to help draw their eyes away.
I'll be needing to
borrow that bow.
We need to collect sticks to light fires
for boiling water. sterilize the linens.
Now. try up that way.
Mistress Fraser.
the bandages you requested.
along with some other supplies.
And I'm told this contains various and
sundry botanicals that are necessary.
Thank you.
Lieutenant Sandy Hammond.
ma'am. at your service.
The supplies are compliments
of Lieutenant Lord Ellesmere.
Duty prevented him from
bringing them himself.
Please relay my utmost
gratitude to him.
Do you think we may be
able to get some food?
I doubt it. ma'am. The lieutenant
sent word to the bakehouse.
but the troops are living off
what they've been carrying.
I'm afraid there's naught to spare until
the supply train arrives. I'm sorry.
Oh.
Lord Ellesmere said I was
to give you this as well.
He said you looked parched.
Please thank the lieutenant
for the libations.
May I ask.
how did you know who I was?
He said you'd be the curly-wig
giving orders like a sergeant major.
Good luck. ma'am.
Feasgar math.
I'm Roger MacKenzie.
Jeremiah's da'.
I was born here
in the Highlands.
and I'm excited to talk to
you today about the Gaelic.
I know some of you have heard
your older relatives speak it
and may even know a
few words yourselves.
How many of you would like
to learn to curse in Gaelic?
We don't have bad words in the
Gaelic like there are in the English.
Gaelic cursing is
a matter of art.
I once heard a
farmer say to a pig
who'd gotten into the mash.
"Gun spreadhadh do mhionnach
tro do bhru's gun
itheadh na feannagan e."
But what does it mean?
May your intestines burst through
your belly and be eaten by crows!
Now.
our people
have been speaking Gaelic
since the fourth century.
The fourth century.
That's over 1.500 years ago.
How many of you know
what waulking songs are?
It's what the women would
sing. all working together.
kneading the wet wool
to make it waterproof.
Exactly.
That kind of thing shouldn't
be lost. should it?
No.
Then there's the line singing.
And it goes back to when
folks hadn't many books.
You'd have a gathering
or a congregation.
someone would lead a song and
the others would sing it back.
Jemmy. Bobby.
These are hymnals and folk
songs from the 19th century
that my late father. the
Reverend Wakefield. collected.
Give them a wee look
while we try our hand
at some line singing.
When I prompt you.
you do the swan calls.
They sound like this…
- Shall we give it a go? - Yes.
Walter?
Walter. I need you to drink
as much of this as you can.
What in God's name is that?
It's a tea.
Ginger. garlic and
cayenne pepper.
Now. I know it's unpleasant.
but it's the best I can do.
I need to thin your blood so we can
dissolve the clot in your lungs. Here.
What I wouldn't
give for something
a little stronger.
Well…
Whatever I drink. it won't likely
change what's going to happen.
will it?
No.
But brandy will help
it go down easier.
Walter. you told me you
liked to dance. didn't you?
That's how you met your wife.
Think of her.
Now. you think of that
first time you held her in your
arms and you danced together.
That just warmed my heart.
Ah. it was my
pleasure. Thank you.
Ah!
It was wonderful. Roger.
I hope you'll consider
coming back in again for us.
Again?
-Really? -Mm.
Do you know. if I'm honest. I have
been feeling a bit. uh. adrift lately.
Teaching today gave me a
nice. um. grounded feeling.
- Is that a yes then?
- You know. I think it is.
Aye.
I'll give you a ring with
some dates and times.
That was great.
Rob Cameron.
Yeah. I know who you are.
You work with my
wife at the hydro.
Best inspector we've had in years.
Doesn't take shite from anyone.
No. she doesn't.
I brought my nephew. Bobby.
that wee hooligan over there.
My sister's a widow. so I pick
up the slack wherever I can.
- Well. I'm glad you enjoyed the class.
- Oh. I loved it.
Was really looking forward to
reading the Reverend's old hymnal.
-Did you not get a chance? -No.
No. I got to read something
with a bit more action instead.
This was with the books
you were handing around.
It looked like it was in there by
mistake. though. so I took it out.
Writing a novel?
-Fiddling with the idea. -Aye.
I don't know how that
got in the stack.
Well. maybe you'll let me
read it when it's finished.
I'm a great one for
the science fiction.
-Well. I have to finish it first.
-Yeah.
Well. I should. uh. probably grab
Jem and get home to make the dinner.
Wow. How's that working for you?
Trust me.
what I've got going on in the
kitchen puts Bree to shame.
Fighting words.
Well. I'd love to try a dish sometime.
Never turned down a home-cooked meal.
- Well. we should. uh. find a time.
- I'm free next week. if that works.
I'll bring the wine.
-Aye. -Aye?
-Aye. Sure. -Perfect.
Well. uh. great.
I'll see you soon.
Godspeed. Walter.
Line them up on this side.
Mistress Fraser.
Just one moment.
Ian.
Uncle Jamie sent me. We're going
to wait here. and as soon as...
Go.
Mr. Murray!
What in God's name
are you doing here?
I'm a scout.
Come from Thayendanegea.
The Mohawk leader you
call Joseph Brant.
-Of course. Your people. -Mm.
It is a fortunate alliance.
- Beneficial for all parties involved.
- Aye. Very fortunate.
As is our meeting like this.
I didn't have the chance to…
I wish to thank you. for the money
and for entrusting me to the care
of the exceedingly
capable Hunters.
I owe you a great debt.
sir. for saving my life.
Well. I better
return to my duties.
Farewell. Mr. Murray.
Mr. Murray.
Did you not mention.
when last we met.
that our first encounter
was at Fraser's Ridge?
Aye.
And that you're the nephew
of one James Fraser?
It is a strange coincidence
that we have a Mistress Fraser
in our camp. also
of Fraser's Ridge.
-Now I believe that would make her...
-His aunt.
You are no scout.
You're a damned liar.
- Are there others?
- It's only me. Come for my aunt.
Mr. Murray. in spite of the
fact that I have caught you
attempting to commit treason.
on my honor. I shall let you go.
- I'm not going without her.
- The lady stays.
She's a prisoner of the King.
William. please.
-Let my auntie go. -I cannot.
-I am duty-bound to...
-Do you owe me a life or not?
Aye. then. It's hers.
Hardly a question of her life.
You don't suppose we kill women?
I ken very well what
your army is capable of.
General Burgoyne is
a gentleman. As am I.
I won't always remain
in your custody. will I?
What happens when you march out of here?
Where will I be sent? To a prison ship.
Christ. man. Turn your back for a
moment and we'll trouble you no more.
For saving my father's life.
There's a gap in the fence
where they're digging
latrine trenches.
-No one will see you go.
-Thank you.
A life for a life.
Murray. We're quits.
Don't let me see you again.
I may not have a choice.
This way.
Auntie.
Sassenach.
Jamie.
Is it well with you?
-You? -Well enough now.
Jamie. all those people.
Women and children.
I just left them.
I know you. Sassenach.
I ken you did all you could.
Dinna think on it anymore.
-Mrs. Raven. she. uh… -Aye.
I ken.
Walter Woodcock.
There wasn't
anything I could do.
I just sat there
and held his hand.
Saved his life only
to watch him die.
Sometimes a hand in the dark
is the comfort a man needs
before his soul takes
its final journey.
Is that brandy?
Where'd you get it?
Your son.
He gave it to me.
Tell me of him.
Later. When there's time.
-Where are we going? -South.
After a few days' journey. we
rejoined the refugees from the fort
who'd found their way back
to the Continental Army.
Jamie's term of service
was almost over.
and we'd be leaving
soon for Scotland.
I was told I'd find you here.
Thee has arrived.
How is thy aunt? Does she
need Denzell's assistance?
He's in the infirmary.
I can take you to him.
No. My aunt is well.
Bride be thanked.
I dinna need your brother.
I need…
Thee needn't be embarrassed. I
know the reason thee has come.
You do?
Of course.
Thee had hoped to see thy
dearest companion. thy dog.
Oh.
Aye.
Has he been a good lad?
I've been letting him sleep in with
us. but during the day. he's taken
to following the Wellman boy.
hoping he'll drop his supper.
Well. better keep
him close then.
Dinna want him getting us
put out of camp for stealing.
That would be most unfortunate.
Dinna fash. Uncle
Jamie's gone out hunting.
I'm sure there'll be enough
food for us. and Rollo.
I hope he wasn't any trouble
to you on the journey.
No. He was quite a comfort
in the woods at night.
Well. if you ever find yourself
unable to sleep at night.
I'll let you take Rollo.
I'm sure he willna mind
keeping you company.
Aren't I the lucky one?
You do that a-purpose?
Aye. I always shoot
'em through the eye.
Best place if you dinna
want to spoil the meat.
-And you are? -James Fraser.
Colonel of Fraser's Irregulars.
I'm Colonel Daniel Morgan.
Commander. Morgan's Rifles.
I'd like you to come with me.
Forgive me. I must speak with
the quartermaster about my tent.
My wife and I have only recently arrived
and have nowhere to lay our heads.
Never mind the quartermaster.
Come with me. I'll be sure
you're well taken care of.
Oh.
And. uh. bring your rifle.
Daniel Morgan?
-I recognize that name. -Yeah.
The skill of his riflemen is
talked of from here to Virginia.
He wants you to
become one of them?
But your enlistment's
almost finished.
Aye.
I said yes. Claire.
I ken that means Scotland will
have to wait a while longer.
Canna leave the fight now.
General Gates has taken
over our Northern Army.
gathering troops on the Hudson.
just outside a village
called Saratoga.
The British are moving
south. A battle is coming.
The Battle of Saratoga.
Jamie. I don't remember
much of the details.
but this is a turning point
for the American cause. The battle
that draws the French into the war.
Then you ken why
I can't walk away.
I knew you wouldn't.
But if you're going to
fight. then I'm glad that
you've accepted
Colonel Morgan's offer.
Aye? Why is that?
By their nature. snipers.
that's what we call
riflemen in the future.
they fight from a distance.
No soldier is safe.
but the further you are
from combat. the better.
I wonder.
why is it that women
don't make wars?
You're not made
for it. Sassenach.
You don't think women are
just as capable as men
at fighting for what
they believe in?
No. No. that's not what I mean.
You've proven to me that they
are. Sassenach. many times.
It's just that women
take so much more
wi' 'em when you go.
When a man dies. it's only him.
And one is much like another.
Aye. a family needs a man
to feed them. protect them.
Any decent man can do it.
A woman takes a life
wi' her when she goes.
A woman is
possibility.
If you think one man
is just like another.
then I can't agree with you.
Perhaps there is some
truth in what you say.
Maybe it's
the ability to create life
that would make it that
much harder to end it.
Canna say I'm so very much
afraid of dying as I used to be.
I shouldna like it. of course.
But there'd maybe be
less regret about it.
Children are grown.
And grandchildren are thriving.
On the other hand.
while I may be less
afraid for myself.
I'm more reluctant to kill young men
who havena yet lived their lives.
Surely you're not going to assess
the ages of those shooting at you.
Difficult.
I sincerely hope you don't intend
to let some whippersnapper kill you
just because he hasn't lived
a life as full as yours yet.
No.
I'll kill them.
I'll just mind it more.
Now.
tell me about William.
Tell me about my son.
He's handsome.
He always has been.
He is thoughtful
and observant.
and he's stubborn.
But clearly a man of honor.
When he looked at me.
I saw the same
kindness in his eyes.
But there was also a fire there.
Fierceness of a Highlander
under all those courtly manners.
What do you think you're doing?
Christ.